[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> When my great friend the
brilliant director Jay Weidner
came to me on behalf of Gaia
network to suggest that I
record a series of shows,
all under the general heading
of "Legacy," first I
asked myself, well,
does that make sense?
Why?
I've already published
a lot of books.
You can look at those.
Then I sat there thinking, yes,
this is perhaps an occasion
to summarize, also for
myself, what I have done,
what I've accomplished
or failed to accomplish.
And so to ask myself
some serious questions.
So let me now speculate just
for a few minutes on the answers
that I've come up with.
First of all, the
question I ask myself,
why did I do what I did?
Why did I inquire
into these issues that
have occupied most of my life?
What did I hope to
accomplish by that?
Well, I should add that
this why has very much
to do with my experience, life
experience from childhood on.
As some of our
viewers might know,
I have started my
professional life
in this lifetime as a musician.
And my experience as,
first a piano prodigy,
started at the age of
nine to play concerts,
and then as a serious musician
for touring the world,
my experience playing
to public, to audiences
was a remarkable one.
It's not an ordinary experience.
When things really
work, you move
into another sphere in music.
You become one with
the public and so
the people, as
individuals, disappear.
We are all a resonance,
vibrating field, together
beyond any ordinary
bounds of space and time.
We can go anywhere we want,
and we feel anything we want.
There are no limits to that.
This is when it really works.
Then you are on this high,
on this great aesthetic
experience, the
catharsis, perhaps.
So I had that
experience, and I always
suspected that this
is not accidental.
It's something--
there is something
in truth in the world that
allows these experiences,
and that they have a
root in the real world.
So I started asking,
what are they?
What kind of a world
is this in which
one can experience wholeness and
oneness and a higher dimension,
or perhaps a deeper dimension?
And I started
trying for answers.
Now, here I must,
right away, follow up
this little introspection
that I'm doing now.
The answers I gave were
not limited by convention.
Why?
Because for the very reason that
I was asking these questions,
I also had no limits in
trying to give the answers,
because I did not lead
a conventional life.
From the time I was
discovered, so to say,
so to speak, as
a musical talent,
I have not been part of any
standard life expectancy, life
style, life community.
I have lived a bit
outside of the box.
Even as a child, I
was considered already
a piano prodigy and did
not visit at school.
But I was a private student.
I just went for the exams
at the end of the term,
and otherwise, I did
the studies on my own.
And I worked with my mother,
who was a piano teacher,
and who had ambitions herself
for becoming a concert pianist.
But she started
in life too late,
and her family was not
enough understanding for what
she really wanted.
And if one starts much later
than seven or eight or nine
years old to work on an
instrument like the piano,
you cannot make it to this level
of perfection that you need
as a concert pianist.
So she took it out on
her son, so to speak.
She expected me to
become a concert pianist,
and this start like that, also.
Now, the questions that I
asked then were out of the box,
were not the standard question,
not limited by anything.
I asked, what kind
of a world is this?
And I did not accept
any standard answer.
It was any answer I would get
from books, from conversations,
I would always ask, does
that really make sense?
And being a musician,
you are very intuitive.
You know how to rely
on your intuition.
Does it sound good?
Is it really likely to be true?
What does one really
feel about it, you know?
So I asked these questions,
and I tested them
against my feelings.
So I was wide-ranging answers,
wide-ranging inquirer.
Is this world really
a material sphere?
Is this one limited
to bodies moving
about in space and in time?
Is there more to it?
Is everything we know coming
to us through our senses?
Could there be more to it?
And these questions led
me to different concepts.
First, to the idea of-- which
nowadays is very much known,
but it wasn't at the time--
namely of interaction,
interdependence,
of the kind of world
where everything
affects everything else.
I was thinking, if I
have these experiences,
perhaps they are part of
a chain of experiences
that are rooted in
reality, which itself
is a chain of events, all
things connected, and together
producing this
experience that we have.
So maybe our experience is
not just limited to the here
and now what we perceive with
our eyes or ears, et cetera.
So I did not hesitate to
explore this possibility.
The experience I had in music
was beyond the ordinary bounds
of the senses, and I
asked, what kind of a world
is it in which such
experiences can come about?
Truly, the first
concept that came
is that beyond, above
or below, someplace,
somehow beyond
the everyday world
that we experience, there
is another reality, a higher
reality, a transcendent reality.
Now, I was not about to go into
any religious dogma or doctrine
and say, well, this is it.
This has been written over here.
This is how it must be.
Because I was asking
questions out of the box,
I was not ready to accept any
prepackaged answer as it were.
So I explored.
What kind of a
world could that be?
And the answers that I came up
with were more based on process
than on existence, more
on becoming than on being.
Constantly things are moving,
constantly developing,
constantly evolving.
Things are not what they are.
Things are what become--
Things are how they
relate to others.
Then I discovered some
philosophies and though
and thinkers, for
example, the process
thinkers like Alfred
North Whitehead, who
said that a thing in the
world is what it is because
of its relation to
everything else,
and it is also something
that is constantly becoming.
So my first concept was this
relational becoming, relational
interdependence, and
to my great amazement,
I discovered that this is the
Buddhist notion of reality.
Interdependent co-origination
it's called in the Buddhist
philosophy.
I didn't know that others
were thinking like this.
There's a whole
tradition like this.
I started exploring
this more and more.
I had a number of experiences
that I will recount, perhaps,
in a moment, but
the gist of it was
that I moved from the idea of
single things moving in space
and time to the idea
of things so related
together that they make each
other, they create each other.
They become what they are
because of each other,
you know?
And this has to be
embedded in something.
Reality had to have
a basis is something.
So then the question
I asked, what
is this reality grounded in?
I'm going to say it's not
grounded in anything hard,
feeling like some solid
rock or whatever, you know?
It had to be grounded
in something fluid
but yet meaningful.
I came across but later,
when I came across
in my inquiry, the
idea of a field.
A field is-- nowadays we
speak very much more of field
because it's an age of
technology, of information.
This was before that.
So it's a fairly new
idea, but in the sciences,
especially in biology,
it was already
existing, already
started up, this notion
of a field in which the organism
appears, a field of life.
Also going back again
to ancient traditions,
a field in which all
living things can evolve.
But could it be a
single field or would it
be part of the overall
field of the world,
of the reality in which
these experiences are
field experiences?
I moved from there to the
idea that all this field
is basically not something
solid and material.
It's real, all right.
It's real, but it's
not something concrete,
cannot be limited
to the here and now.
But think what happens in
this field at any one part
also happening in
these other parts.
It's all happening together.
It's all evolving as one thing.
Now, this was, just recall, way
before the quantum revolution.
It was in the 1950s, 1960s.
Some scientists already
had these notions,
but the wide quantum revolution
at the end of the 20th century
didn't arrive yet at that time.
So I asked myself,
could this field
be a psychic field,
a mental field?
But I did not like, finally,
the idea that we just
have to give up our
notions of reality
and say everything is a thought.
If it's a thought,
if it's an idea,
also that must be rooted
in something that produces
that thought, that idea.
So the field as an
informational reality,
that was then the next
step and probably,
that's where I'm
still today, someplace
where I think that the world
is running on information,
and the field is primarily
energy of a particular kind.
Not a random energy, but
highly-focused energy
moving in a given direction.
Now, this to me, has always
been very intriguing.
I might also say satisfactory,
because it gives answers
to the question,
why are we here,
and also where are we going?
Because the answer to why
we are here is to go where
we are meant to go.
So if there is a purpose
underlying things,
then we are here
as an instrument
to fulfill that purpose.
Maybe the instrument is our
thinking, is our consciousness,
is our mind, but it is here
to explore a reality which
is also beyond that.
This, which is connected,
but it's not limited to that.
There is a reality
beyond the mind.
Of course, I started reading
major philosophers, East
and West, and discovered that
what I am thinking of exploring
has been known for thousands
of years, has been explored,
developed.
But I did it, I think,
in the right order.
Most students of
philosophy and of science,
but especially philosophy,
work in the wrong order.
They get the answers before
they pose the questions.
When you go to an academy,
to a school, to a university,
you're being taught all kinds
of doctrines and answers
to questions that
you didn't ask.
The real philosophy, I
think, the real insight
comes from asking and
asking the kind of questions
that I've been asking myself
in a very presumptuous way.
Because in my early 20s,
mid-20s and late 20s,
I somehow had the
idea that if I am
serious about posing
this question,
then I come to insights, even
though everything has already
been explored and written about.
Maybe I can come up with
something new, certainly
something that will
satisfy me more.
It's a presumption I would
hesitate to undertake today,
but I still believe
that there are things
to be explored, to discover.
But at that time, I
looked at the world
as an open area for
exploration, something
that you could get to know.
And then you get to
know, you get the world
that you get to know yourself.
Because this idea that I--
I'm speaking of myself in
this self-exploration mode,
because I, myself, am very much
a part of what I experience.
I'm out here and what I
experience being over there.
I am the experience.
And I evolve, because
the world evolves.
I become something.
And this process philosophy,
applied to the mind,
didn't become for me
a kind of idealism,
where it says that all there is,
is mind and everything is mind.
Mind is an element of this.
The consciousness is
an element of this.
But the whole thing cannot
be said is purely mind,
anymore than it's said it's
probably purely matter,
all things.
It's something beyond all that.
And then strangely, or perhaps
not so strangely, I ended up--
up till now, at least,
up to this point,
because I want to evolve,
continue to think about this--
I ended up with something like
Oriental or basic mysticism,
the idea that the fundamental
element of the universe
is a mystical intelligence, is
an intelligence that decides,
that conducts, that guides.
It governs, but in a
cybernetic sense of governing,
as a governing function,
guides the way things evolve.
There is something that is
being realized in this world.
There's something that is
becoming in the world, which
is bigger than you and me, which
is bigger than any human being,
but it is something that
we can try to explore.
We will never get
to the bottom of it,
but we will understand,
perhaps, a little bit,
always a little bit more.
And this understanding
can give us
answers as to who we are, why
we are here, where we come from,
where we are going.
Included in this
exploration is the idea
that there is more to
the world than what
we perceive with our senses.
If you assume that and
you're willing to ask
for questions without limits,
leading a life out of the box,
so to speak, where
you don't feel limited
and you are presumptuous
to the extent
that you think you can
find answers, then you get,
I think, to these ideas
that I've gotten to.
I still believe that these
are the most logical ideas,
the most coherent ideas.
The world is really
truly like a great idea,
but it's not just an idea.
It's everything that there
is, is idea-like, mental-like.
It's there, of course, in
all the base philosophies.
It's been also in Hegel
in wherever you look.
It's in Eastern philosophies.
It's all there.
But I discovered it for
myself, the hard way.
I asked myself this question.
I was privileged
in the sense that I
could ask these questions.
I had the opportunity.
I led a life as
a concert pianist
until I was in my mid-30s.
I was exploring these questions.
I was reading.
I was writing.
I was publishing, also.
But I could survive
without being
forced into more into a box.
And I'm very grateful to have
had this opportunity to do so.
And I always
continue doing this.
I feel it is is part
of my goal in life,
part of my mission in
life to ask questions
without limits as to ordinary,
everyday rationality,
ask questions and explore
where they will take me.
So this lifestyle,
this exploration,
which has been going on now
for well over half a century,
is perhaps my
mission in life, what
I want to communicate
as my legacy,
the fruits of this exploration.
Not because it's a
final answer, but it's
the answer that somebody who
dared to ask the questions
and was lucky enough to have
the opportunity to explore,
to look for answers.
These are the answers that
I've come up in this lifetime.
I should add that I believe that
this is not the only lifetime,
that these explorations,
that this adventure of mine
in the universe will continue
beyond any individual lifetime,
and that perhaps
the one lifetime can
prepare the ground for another.
And so then, let's address
this one last issue, question
about why I was engaging
in these explorations?
Because I've come to
believe, cautiously believe,
not automatically, that what
I'm doing now in this lifetime
will affect my future
lifetimes and will
affect the lives of others,
now and in the future.
That we are sufficiently
interdependent, interacting,
sufficiently co-evolving.
So what happens
to one, especially
to one consciousness, one
mind, also affects others.
So if I come up
with some answers,
some hunches as to what this
bigger reality that we call
the universe may
be like, then that
could possibly be
of use to others,
so it's worth communicating.
My attempt at communicating
were unintentional.
It came about
accidentally, and I
will recall some of those
anecdotes in a moment.
But I never really
intended what I've
been doing to be written down,
to be recorded, to be conveyed.
I did it for myself, because
I wanted to find out.
And I believed that by
finding out for myself,
I help others,
even without having
to put it on a piece of
paper or a tape or whatever.
So I am here now,
when I can communicate
and I wish to communicate.
And this lifetime of
experiences is possibly
the kind of experience
that will enrich
the experience of
others, and this
could have concrete
implications,
concrete consequences.
In the last count, who we are
is what our consciousness is.
We see the world through
our consciousness.
If that changes, if
that grows and evolves,
we'll act differently
and perhaps it
has this indirect but
very meaningful effect.
When you come to true
insights, you change yourself,
and by changing yourself,
you change the world.
Another presumption,
if you like, but it's
something that motivated me
to continue these explorations
and now motivates me
to try to summarize it
as part of my legacy,
a personal element
of my legacy for whoever
wishes to enter into it.
My explorations began
as a concert pianist,
not a regular, normal concert
pianist but as a child.
I remember the first
concert in Budapest.
It was the Budapest
Philharmonic.
The first public concert,
because I played many times
in private, in salons.
It was fashionable in those days
to have it in private salons,
and you invite people.
You had 20, 30, maybe
up to 50 people,
and somebody is
invited to play music.
And I did that from the
time I was seven years old,
when it was discovered that
I have some gift for music.
Indeed, it was very simple
for me to play music.
Didn't have to study it.
Even to this day, I'm very
poor at reading scores.
I hardly ever
learned from scores.
As a child, I learned by my
mother playing for me a piece,
and I would then play it again.
I would play that, pick it
up, and continue, or just
learn that.
But I never studied this from
a school, much less studied
what the composer had in mind.
I just intuitively,
I played the music.
So I played private
concerts like this,
and then when I was nine,
I played with the Budapest
Philharmonic in a concert hall,
which still exists in Budapest.
And it was a memorable
event, but you
would think that this is
a big event for a child.
But I was more
interested in the gifts
that I would get after each
of these appearances, which
are usually beautiful wreathes.
That was, in those days,
you were given a wreath.
It had a silk ribbon with all
the date of the concert on it.
And and I had a wall of my
room in my parents' apartment
covered with these
decorations on the wall.
So I was interested in that.
I was also interested
in the candies
I would be getting
after each concert.
And so the first concert that
I had at the age of nine,
I played a Mozart
piano concerto.
And when I walked on the
stage, there was, instead
of the usual applause,
there was this sort
of some astonished
people laughing and sort
of talking to each other.
Ha, ha, ha, ha.
What's that?
Because there was a child, a
nine-year-old child in shorts,
moving up on the stage.
Who was here?
It finally turns out who
he was, and I sat down
in front of the piano.
And the orchestra started
playing the concerto,
and I played.
So it was a big
experience for the public,
and it was then
remarked, many times,
and I was asked to
play the concert.
For me, the principal
experience was
seeing the lady, who was the
sponsor of many musicians.
She was a wealthy lady, who
was not there at the beginning
of the concert.
And I missed her, because
she is the one who
usually brought me all the
candies and the flowers
and everything.
And in the first movement
of this concerto,
I saw a sort of a
little commotion
there in the first row, and
there was the lady coming in.
And I was so pleased to see
her, and she was holding
a big basket in her arm.
And I was so pleased
to look at it,
that I speculated for a moment,
what could be in the basket,
and failed to come in on time,
when the piano is supposed
to come in with the orchestra.
I remember to this moment,
the conductor turning around
with astonishment
and looking at me.
There's a child,
what's he doing?
He's not coming in
when he should be.
Turning to me and lifting
the score, and this movement
on his part, of turning to
me and lifting the score,
it gave me such a fright.
It's given me such
a sensation of,
my god, what am I doing,
that I never forgot it.
I've always been extra
careful as a musician
as to know exactly what I'm
doing and to stay concentrated.
This is something that
impressed, imprinted itself
on my mind.
Well, anyway, the
concert went well.
I duly got the candy and
the wreaths afterwards.
So it all went very well.
And I kept-- then the war years
came, but after the war years
I continued to play.
And the big event was that,
when I was 15 years old,
I could be registered as a
candidate as a participant
for the International
Music Competition
in Geneva, which took place
once a year in September.
And so after the war,
it was the second time,
in September of, I think,
it's '45, I believe.
And the previous year,
I couldn't be accepted,
because I was 14 years old.
And this time I
was 15 years old.
I already had my
degree from music
from the Academy of Music.
And I was sent out
as a participant
on behalf of the State
Ministry in Hungary.
Because these were the
years, as some of the viewers
will remember, of the Cold
War, the Iron Curtain.
You couldn't move from Eastern
Europe to Western Europe,
except by very
special permission.
So I got this permission.
And because I was just
turned 15, I could go.
My mother could come
with me, being a minor.
And we went out, carrying
a small suitcase, which
is all they would let us carry,
and having a passport which is
valid for all of three weeks.
We were expected to return.
And then when I got one
of the grand prizes there,
jointly with a Spanish
pianist, then I didn't return.
We got offers to go out.
And carrying the small suitcase,
went on to Paris and then
to other cities and managed
to get an international visa--
an international passport, which
is limited in its validity,
but it served for a time being.
And so I never returned
to our native Hungary
to live after that.
Interestingly enough, that
international passport
was then supplemented
or substituted
by the resident permit in the
US, not by a normal means.
Because the normal means would
have been a quota from Hungary,
which would take six
years to run through,
because there were a very
limited number of people
who were accepted.
But a special permission,
which was done through,
what's known as a private
bill by a Senator,
Senator of the US,
Senator Pepper,
who heard my concert in
Washington in the Constitution
Hall.
And he asked if there is
anything he can do for me.
I said, certainly, Senator,
something you can do for me,
stop me from being deported.
Because my visa for the US on
this international passport
would expire the following week,
and I would have to return.
And I would like to stay.
And Senator Pepper
said, come see me
in my office tomorrow
in the Capitol building.
I did, and he said, don't worry.
I'll introduce a private
bill in the Congress
to nominate you for citizenship.
And even though that
will take maybe up
to a year to run through,
but in the meanwhile,
you can't be deported.
You can stay.
And I said fine.
And so he signed the papers.
And not about six or
eight months later,
I got my US citizenship based
on the private bill in Congress.
The next step in this
adventurous developments
from concert pianist was an
event, a New Year's event,
which was not a musical event.
But it was the first New Year
after my first son was born.
And with my wife, we went
out to the Austrian Alps
for that weekend.
And we skated.
We looked at these
beautiful outbound regions.
And at night, that night,
before going to sleep,
I looked out on the
balcony of my hotel
in Garmisch, which was
the name of the town.
And there I saw the villages,
like pearls lying in the snow
all around us and the
peaks of the mountains.
And I said, those
thoughts that I've
had ever since as a child about
what meaning there is to life
and there is more to
it than what you see,
I should look at
those more seriously.
And then, at that
moment, I had the resolve
that, together with my
life as a concert pianist,
I would also start reading,
start attending courses.
I ascribed in various
courses in New York,
for example, at Columbia at the
famous New School for Social
Research, in Munich
in the University
there, wherever I was.
And I followed these
courses without actually
taking degrees, because I
already had a music degree.
And as a concert pianist, I
didn't need any other degree.
But there I was, basically
following the courses,
making notes, reading, taking
notes, and writing, as well.
So this resolve
resulted in my becoming
serious about exploring these
things that I talked about.
The next major step came when
these explorations gave rise
to a first step in a
professional career,
the change of career.
Unexpected, totally,
but perhaps not
entirely meaningless
or accidental.
I had a concert in
the Hague, in Holland.
And I was feeling
very well, because I
thought the concerts went well.
And after the concert,
there was a usual dinner
served near the concert hall.
And this hall was also near
the hotel that I stayed.
And in this dinner, some
special guests were invited
and one of them
started talking to me,
and asking me whether
I ever thought
why I'm doing what I'm doing?
What good is it?
And this sort of challenged me.
What am I really doing, playing
concerts, spending my life
playing in the public?
And I said, yes indeed, I have
thought about these things.
And he said, did you
ever write anything down.
I said, sure.
I was carrying-- my
notebook is with me always.
It had become quite a
thick book, and I have it.
I have it with me.
And he said, can I read it?
OK.
I was feeling good.
It was after the concert.
I thought it went well.
So I went over to my room.
I got him a pile of notes.
And I said, here, I don't
know what to do with it.
I keep writing every day
on it, but this is just
what occurs to me.
And he said thank you.
And then he talked to others,
and then I looked around,
and he wasn't there anymore.
These were handwritten notes,
and I was a bit worried
about what happened.
I didn't have any copies.
But he showed up next
morning, and he said,
we will publish it.
And I said, who are you?
I said, well, the gentleman
who I met last night
turned out to be the editor
of a prestigious publishing
house, Martinus Nijhoff
of the Hague in Holland.
And he indeed did publish it.
It wasn't as simple
as that, because it
took a year to put the notes
into order and the chapters,
make references and so on.
He helped me with
the formalities.
But this is how my book got
published, the first book.
And this is the first
time it occurred to me
that what I'm doing for myself
could be of interest to anybody
else.
Up till then, I didn't
even show it to others,
because my sense was that
people don't take seriously
what a concert artist is doing
when he starts philosophizing.
Leave that to philosophers
or to scientists.
Just play the music.
But somehow, I was very
protectionist about it,
protective about it.
But here, the book appeared.
It was in 1963 that it appeared.
This incidence was in '61.
In 1963, it was my first book.
I was 31 years old at the time.
And that changed my whole
career, my whole life,
because this book came to the
attention of various people,
including the head of the
Department of Philosophy
at Yale University,
who at one point
just simply invited me,
and said come over and give
a series of seminars on
the ideas of your book.
Because your idea is
very close to Whitehead
and to [INAUDIBLE],,
Umberto, and others.
[INAUDIBLE] came later,
but Umberto [INAUDIBLE]..
So I didn't know what to do.
I was on the horns of a dilemma.
Because you can't
do serious seminars
at Yale and at the same live
the life of a concert artist.
You have to choose, at
least for the time being.
And I was undecided
until it was also
decided for me by any incident,
which happened in Bonn.
Now, Bonn is the birthplace
of Ludwig van Beethoven, who
lived most of his
life in Vienna,
but he was born in
Bonn, near Cologne.
And this town, to this day,
remains a kind of a shrine
to the genius of the Beethoven.
And I was very
honored by having been
asked to give a recital of
Beethoven sonatas in Bonn.
I was settling
into this concept,
and I remember forgetting
to get off the train,
because I was so busy
thinking about my thoughts,
that I had to finally jump off.
Because we already
arrived, and I
was deep in thinking about
the ideas of evolution
and universal interdependence
and all these things.
And during the concept,
I kept thinking about it.
In fact, it was very
difficult to remove my mind.
So while I was
playing, as it happens,
it's Sonata Opus 53, which is
known as the Waldstein Sonata.
While I was playing it, I was
thinking about these ideas,
and I forgot where I was.
And in the middle of
the second movement,
which has the usual structure,
where you play the first, then
the second.
Then you need to go
back to the first part
and go back to the second part.
You continue in a
different way to the end.
So in the middle of that part,
I was playing the main theme.
I realized that here I'm
sitting in a concert hall,
playing the second
movement of the sonata,
and I don't know if I
played it for the first time
or for the second time,
because it comes back again.
You see, if I make
the wrong decision,
I either skip the entire rest
of the movement, or I repeat it.
Either one, would be very
unpleasant, unprecedented.
So I said--
I had to jump and
make a decision.
I decided I already played it.
I go on to the third movement
and nobody said anything.
It must have been
the right decision.
But then I said, if this turns
out to be the right decision,
I am going to accept
the offer from Yale.
The next morning, I
went to the post office.
I sent a telegram to the head
of the department of philosophy,
Professor Shrader and
I said, I'm coming.
And that meant that I had to
give up the life of a concert
artist and become an academic.
From Yale, I went
on to other places.
I met another guest
professor at Yale
who was from the University
in Paris, Sorbonne,
and he said, I read
your book, and I
would like you to present
these ideas at the Sorbonne.
And how could we do this?
And I said, very simple,
if you invite me to present
a thesis for a doctorate.
He said, of course.
And so I presented a
thesis, a doctoral thesis
at the Sorbonne, for which
I got a doctoral degree
at the Sorbonne,
without ever having
attended a university
in my life,
except in this very informal
way of sitting in, in classes.
And I've got jobs of teaching in
various universities in the US,
then in other places, as well.
But in the US, on the west
coast in the Middle East,
and the east.
And I was in the
curious position
of teaching students, who are
already well into the subject
matter of philosophy.
And I have never
learned any of that.
I was just working on my
own, exploring my own.
So I didn't even know--
one of the biggest
problems I had,
I didn't know how
to give an exam.
I never took an exam in
a university, you know?
All through these years
of teaching and acting
as an academic, my music
was in the background
but it created both
inspiration and framework.
It was a framework for
seeking something in science,
seeking wholeness, seeking
completion, seeking
meaning, not just the part.
I would never look at just one
thing as one thing in itself.
I would always look, how
is it related to the rest?
In music, a single tone
doesn't make any sense,
doesn't have a meaning.
Only the relationship
has a meaning.
So I was always looking.
A single statement in
philosophy or science
doesn't have a
meaning in itself.
What is the whole thing
that it conveys, meaning?
that we want to know?
What kind of a world is this?
Always the big questions.
So I never stopped
with a given question.
I always asked, how is
this possible in the world
in which we live?
Is the experience that
we have of this world?
That's why I always
pursued the big questions,
and I didn't really care
what, in the profession,
my colleagues would say to them.
I just went ahead.
Music is an experience
of meaning and wholeness,
and that's a mystical quest.
That is the quest, I
think, basically to also
to all great
thinkers, whether they
call themselves scientists
or theologians or mystics
or whatever.
The ideas that I could
pursue, insisted on pursuing,
led me to some concepts,
some insights that
have practical consequences,
practical in the sense
that you could
apply to your life.
Systems theory was
new at the time,
when I started working with
it in the '60s and '70s.
Now, it's very widespread.
But systems theory says
that one thing is always
connected so that
together they create
an action, a development.
And I would say to young people,
don't look only at the part,
at the single element, look
at how it hangs together.
What does it finally do?
What does it do to you?
What does it do to your world?
Think systemically, which
today, in a less forbidding way,
perhaps you can say,
think holistically.
And this is mysticism in one
way, but it's not science.
In between, came quantum
science, quantum theory, which
shows that each thing in a
system, in a quantum system
is so related to the
others, that simultaneously,
nonlocally, all
things occur together.
So I would say to young
people, look at the context
and try to understand how
your situation, your existence
in this world can
relate to that.
So that that context becomes
more whole, more true.
We talked about it before,
and we will talk again
about the fact that what
there is in the world
is a series of co-evolutions,
series of things
that are evolving together.
And only when that
co-evolution is moving forward
is your participation
in it meaningful.
Only then, you contribute
to that co-evolution.
Because the world does not
run by looking at the whole.
The world looks at only what
happens now, in a momentary way
and only in one part
and disregards this.
So bringing this back,
it's not only idealistic,
it's very, very practical.
Because unless you look
at the whole thing, how
it develops, how it hangs
together, how what you do
belongs to that.
Otherwise, you can go
off on the wrong tangent,
and you won't find out until
you notice that really it
doesn't lead to anywhere.
What leads someplace
is this total system
that evolves with
you as a part of it.
[MUSIC PLAYING]